Agency for Enterprise Information Technology (AEIT) Enterprise E-mail Functional Requirements Specification Version 1.5 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 Revision History Date Version Description Author 8/27/2009 1.0 Basic and Extended requirements Scott Jecko added to document for review by functional requirements team. 9/1/2009 1.1 Basic and extended requirements Scott Jecko updated based on feedback from requirements team. 9/2/2009 1.2 Document updated (archiving Scott Jecko requirements added) in preparation for sending to team and key stakeholders for final review. 9/4/2009 1.3 Document updated: added basic Scott Jecko requirements 1.9 and 1.10 (public folders) based on feedback from technical team. 9/15/2009 1.4 Document updated: added basic Scott Jecko requirement 1.27 (ability for user to customize their view in the client application) based on feedback from AEIT Advisory Committee. 9/17/2009 1.5 Document updated: modified Scott Jecko requirements 1.14, 1.22, 1.72, and 1.77 based on feedback from HSMV. 9/17/2009 AEIT ii Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 Table of Contents 1. Enterprise E-mail Scope 1 2. Requirements Workgroup Methodology 2 3. Requirements Workgroup Goals 3 4. Requirements Workgroup Glossary 4 5. Requirements Workgroup Team 5 6. Requirements Workgroup References 5 7. Basic Functional Requirements 6 8. Extended Functional Requirements 10 9. Functional Requirements Summary 12 9/17/2009 AEIT iii Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 Requirements Specification 1. Enterprise E-mail Scope Define the scope of the “Enterprise E-mail” project. (from F.S. 282.34 and Preliminary Scope Statement). 282.34 Statewide e-mail system.--A state e-mail system that includes the service delivery and support for a statewide e-mail, messaging, and calendaring service is established as an enterprise information technology service as defined in s. 282.0041. The service shall be designed to meet the needs of all executive branch agencies and reduce the current cost of operation and support. The product of this project will be a proposed plan for the establishment of the statewide electronic mail system. By December 31, 2009, the AEIT shall submit the proposed plan to the Governor, the President of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives. The plan shall be developed to reduce costs to the state and include, at a minimum: a) An analysis of the in-house and external sourcing options that should be considered for delivery and support of the service. The analysis shall include an internally hosted system option, an externally sourced system option, and, if necessary, a combined in- house and externally sourced option. b) A cost-benefit analysis that estimates all major cost elements associated with each sourcing option, including the nonrecurring and recurring costs of each option. The analysis must also include a comparison of the total cost of each enterprise e-mail sourcing option and the total cost of existing e-mail services in order to determine the level of savings that can be expected. c) Estimated expenditures for each state agency associated with e-mail costs for the 2009-2010 fiscal year. d) The plan must identify any existing e-mail infrastructure that should be considered for reuse. e) A concise analysis of the ability of each sourcing option to meet major system requirements, including federal and state requirements for confidentiality, privacy, and security. f) A complete description of the scope of functionality, operations, and required resources associated with each sourcing option. g) Recommendations for standardizing the format of state e-mail addresses. h) A reliable schedule for the decommission of all state agency e-mail systems and the migration of all agencies to the new system beginning by July 1, 2010, and completing by June 30, 2013. 9/17/2009 AEIT 1 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 2. Requirements Workgroup Methodology Define the process by which requirements were gathered and grouped as either “basic” or “extended”. The primary objective for the requirements workgroup was to gather all functional requirements for the state e-mail system (via excel spreadsheet) and compile all requirements into a complete, concise, and categorized functional requirements specification. The activities required to compile the requirements specification included reviewing the 2006 e-mail survey (and additional historical documentation), creating the 2009 e-mail survey, sending 2009 survey to agency e-mail (business) experts, compiling survey results into the formal requirements specification, and obtaining requirements approval from key stakeholders. Note: There are two subsequent surveys being sent out (to gather current agency inventory and financial information); the results of these two subsequent surveys are not included in this document. The workgroup reviewed the 2006 survey (and other data sources such as schedule IV-C data and AEIT DCC questionnaire) and determined the list of categories and questions to be included in the survey. Agencies were asked to respond to each requirement question by selecting “currently have and use”, “do not have/do not use”, or “would like to have”. Agreed upon categories for the 2009 survey included E-mail, Calendar, & Contacts (user interface and administrative re quirements); Archiving, Retention, Search, Discovery requirements; Disaster Recovery requirements, Backup & Restore requirements; Security, Anti-Virus, Filtering requirements; Remote Access & Mobile Messaging requirements; Additional E-mail requirements. The survey also provided a section for agencies to address their concerns/issues regarding a statewide e-mail system. Upon receiving all survey responses, the workgroup determined which requirements should be recommended for inclusion in the “basic” and “extended” section of the functional requirements specification. Factors that were considered in the basic or extended decision included, % of agencies that currently provide, # of total users currently supported, and the legal necessity of fulfilling the requirement. The workgroup also identified whether the requirement will be a user, agency admin, or SSRC admin capability. Once approval of this document is obtained from key stakeholders, these functional requirements will be used as an attachment in upcoming RFI’s and potential RFP’s (or ITN’s). An in house or externally sourced solution should meet the basic functional requirements specified in this document (or provide ample reasoning why a requirement is not technically or financially feasible). 9/17/2009 AEIT 2 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 3. Requirements Workgroup Goals Goal ID: Name – Description Manage Scope: Understand the preliminary scope statement for the statewide e- 3.1 mail system and ensure that requirements remain within scope. 3.2 Manage Time: Specification must be complete within 6 weeks (30 business days). Manage Time: Workgroup will use the 2006 Messaging Optimization Workgroup 3.3 Survey as a basis for the 2009 Enterprise e-mail survey. Ensure Completeness: Specification must be complete and detailed enough to 3.4 submit to outside vendors as Request For Information (RFI) or Request For Proposals (RFP) or an Invitation to Negotiate (ITN). Ensure Completeness: Specification must include an attachment which provides a narrative and breakdown of existing agency resources (personnel, equipment – including storage capabilities, software-licenses) and current spend (reuse IV-C data 3.5 where applicable) on e-mail. (Note: this information will be captured in the inventory survey which is being compiled by the Enterprise E-mail technical team – and is not included in this functional specification.) Ensure Completeness: Specification must include an attachment which lists each agencies’ risks, issues, or constraints (such as software-application dependencies, contracts, or legal requirements) that may affect their ability to transition to an 3.6 Enterprise E-mail System. (Note: this information will be compiled into a FAQ document which will be posted to the project web site and made available to all stakeholders.) 9/17/2009 AEIT 3 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 4. Requirements Workgroup Glossary Glossary Name – Description ID: Basic requirements - The functional requirements that should be met as part of the 4.1 “basic” (minimal) solution-offering (whether in house or outsourced). Note: all functional requirements will be subject to a technical and financial feasibility analysis. Extended requirements - The functional requirements that could be met as part of the 4.2 “extended” solution offering (potentially at an additional cost to the customer). Note: all functional requirements will be subject to a technical and financial feasibility analysis. E-mail, Calendar, Contacts - The end-user services of an e-mail product that can be 4.3 found in all e-mail platforms in use by the State today. Archiving, Retention, Discovery - The method of retaining e-mail messages to comply with the Freedom of Information Act, Florida Public Records Law, State and Federal retention requirements, Sarbanes Oxley, HIPAA or agency-specific requirements; Archiving is a systematic approach to saving and protecting e-mail messages in their entirety which can be retrieved by the individual user and/or a system administrator; Retention is a period of time e-mail messages are retained to meet agency and/or 4.4 federal requirements; Discovery is the ability to search e-mail archives, journals, etc. based on specific criteria to provide information for legal and public records requests; Search is the ability to scan e-mails based on specific criteria such as sender, date, subject, content, etc. and produce results for review. E-mail Searches for compliance with Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, public record requests, court ordered production of electronic records, IG or internal investigations, etc. include various levels of complexity, software utilities and their underlying databases. Disaster Recovery - The services that allow an agency to continue to work during and/or soon after a disaster. Disasters can affect one agency in the loss of a server to 4.5 affecting multiple agencies after a natural disaster such as a hurricane. Business continuity and recovery plans are designed to address all severity levels. Backup & Restore - Making copies of data so that these additional copies may be used 4.6 to recover the original after a data loss event. Security, Anti-Virus, Filtering - The services that protect the end-user from receiving 4.7 inappropriate, threatening and/or destructive messages as well as protecting sent data. Remote Access, Mobile Messaging - The method by which a user can access their e- 4.8 mail and/or other services by means other than at their work site. Additional E-mail Services - The features and services that allow users to 4.9 communicate with their co-workers, project team, etc. outside of sending an e-mail. 9/17/2009 AEIT 4 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 5. Requirements Workgroup Team Name Role Contact E-mail Contact Phone Jason Allison Project Lead Jason.Allison@aeit.myflorida.com 414-8046 Requirements 414-6776 Scott Jecko Scott.jecko@aeit.myflorida.com Lead Requirements 413-7906 Terry Kester Terry.Kester@aeit.myflorida.com Lead Workgroup 921-4487 Scott H. Higgins scott_higgins@dcf.state.fl.us Participant Workgroup 727.518.3202 ext. Joel Gallay gallayj@fdva.state.fl.us Participant 507 Workgroup 414-4057 James Payne James.Payne1@dot.state.fl.us Participant Workgroup 414-4417 Stacey Burns Stacey.Burns@dot.state.fl.us Participant Workgroup 728-6308 Phillip Gorden Phil.Gorden@dot.state.fl.us Participant Workgroup 245-3117 Kevin Kerckhoff Kevin.Kerckhoff@dep.state.fl.us Participant Workgroup 414-2952 George Powell George.Powell@ssrc.myflorida.com Participant 6. Requirements Workgroup References Reference Name Location and Description Preliminary Scope AEIT Site Statement http://www.myflorida.com/myflorida/cabinet/aeit/index.php?pg=proj&proj =ent_e-mail Florida Statute Fl Senate Site 282.34 http://www.leg.state.fl.us/STATUTES/index.cfm?App_mode=Display_Sta (Statewide e-mail tute&Search_String=&URL=Ch0282/SEC34.HTM&Title=-%3e2009- system) %3eCh0282-%3eSection%2034%230282.34 Florida Statute Fl Senate Site 282.041 http://www.leg.state.fl.us/Statutes/index.cfm?App_mode=Display_Statut (Definitions) e&Search_String=&URL=Ch0282/SEC0041.HTM&Title=->2008- >Ch0282->Section%200041#0282.0041 9/17/2009 AEIT 5 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 7. Basic Functional Requirements Req. Category List the basic functional requirements – what capabilities # should the service provide. 1.1 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to send, receive, and delete e-mail and Contacts attachments. 1.2 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to reply to e-mail and attachments. Contacts 1.3 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to forward e-mail and attachments. Contacts 1.4 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to print e-mail messages. Contacts 1.5 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to customize e-mail messages with word Contacts processor like features for formatting of e-mail content. 1.6 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to establish rules (auto reply, out of office reply, Contacts temporary transfer to another party, move files to inbox folders). 1.7 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to spell check. Contacts 1.8 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to organize content into personal folders or Contacts similar storage mechanism to aid with e-mail retrieval. 1.9 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the agency admin to migrate existing public folders into Contacts the statewide e-mail system. 1.10 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the agency admin to create and manage public folders Contacts or similar storage mechanism to aid with the collection, organization, and sharing of information with other people in their individual agency or organization. 1.11 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to create contact lists, including those imported Contacts from other sources. 1.12 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to export contact lists. Contacts 1.13 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to share contact lists / address book. Contacts 1.14 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the agency admin to create and share distribution lists Contacts (including the ability to create query based distribution lists from LDAP-like directory services). 1.15 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to create calendars and customize calendar Contacts views. 1.16 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to schedule resources such as conference Contacts rooms, teleconference rooms, etc. 1.17 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to create reminders and tasks. Contacts 1.18 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the agency admin to accommodate programmer testing Contacts of e-mail functionality embedded in software applications. 9/17/2009 AEIT 6 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 1.19 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to share inbox, calendar, and files with users, Contacts given permission. 1.20 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to delegate their permissions to another user. Contacts 1.21 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to embed links to files and websites in e-mails. Contacts 1.22 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the agency admin to provision e-mail accounts for their Contacts individual agency or organization (including the ability to integrate e-mail account provisioning with LDAP-like directory services). 1.23 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to search for e-mails based on age, size, Contacts sender, recipient, subject, key word, attachment content. 1.24 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the agency admin to auto-enforce standard conventions Contacts for creating accounts and distribution lists. 1.25 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the data center admin to control message size limits for Contacts e-mail (inbound and outbound). 1.26 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the agency admin to create generic email Contacts accounts/addresses to be accessed by multiple users. 1.27 E-mail, Calendar, Ability for the user to customize their view in the client application Contacts (such as adding fields, arranging fields, and ordering emails by fields). 1.28 Archiving, Ability for the user to archive at the desktop. Retenti on, Discovery 1.29 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to provide a server based archiving Retention, solution. Discovery 1.30 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to archive at various regularly defined Retention, intervals. Discovery 1.31 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to search archive and forward, print Retention, and restore in bulk items from archive. Discovery 1.32 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to filter archive by sender, recipient, Retention, date, subject, content, attachments, keyword, etc. Discovery 1.33 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to provide long term retention Retention, separate from active e-mail system. Discovery 1.34 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to provide individual users the ability Retention, to search their portion of the archive repository. Discovery 1.35 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to meet Federal regulations for Retention, retention (i.e. Sarbanes Oxley, Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB), Discovery HIPAA, etc.) 9/17/2009 AEIT 7 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 1.36 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to satisfy legal requests for e-mail Retention, discovery and provide printed or digital results. Discovery 1.37 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to capture all sent and received e- Retention, mails into the organization. Discovery 1.38 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to select the e-mail retention period Retention, for a specific e-mail (e.g. 1 year, 3 year, or 5 year). Discovery 1.39 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to search the e-mail "header" Retention, including Date: From, Subject, To, and CC. Discovery 1.40 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to search the "body" of the e-mail Retention, including the header and all text contained within the e-mail itself. Discovery 1.41 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to perform a "full text" search Retention, including the header, body and any attachments to the e-mail. Discovery 1.42 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to support litigation requests by Retention, production of responsive e-mail in to a specified location, for read Discovery and redaction purposes. 1.43 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to move older data to tiered storage Retention, (lower cost storage) while maintaining accessibility. Discovery 1.44 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to import data from other sources Retention, such as PST, NSF files into archiving solution. Discovery 1.45 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to put discovery search results on Retention, legal hold to suspend deletion. Discovery 1.46 Archiving, Ability for the user (Legal, OIG, etc.) to review and mark discovery Retention, search results. Discovery 1.47 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to search using Boolean fields. Retention, Discovery 1.48 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to archive based on policy (i.e. e-mail Retention, address, OU, group, organization, etc.) Discovery 1.49 Archiving, Ability for the user to delete, or flag for deletion by system Retention, administrators, e-mails that have met their retention, in Discovery accordance with s.119.021(2)(c) which requires agencies to “systematically dispose of records no longer needed.” (Note: Deletion means complete removal/elimination of all copies of an e- mail from all portions of the system)” 9/17/2009 AEIT 8 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 1.50 Archiving, Ability for the user to flag individual e-mails to not be archived. Retention, Discovery 1.51 Backup, Restore Ability for the data center admin to recover at the file level. 1.52 Backup, Restore Ability for the data center admin to recover all messages. 1.53 Backup, Restore Ability for the data center admin to recover a specific e-mail message. 1.54 Backup, Restore Ability for the data center admin to recover by mailbox. 1.55 Backup, Restore Ability for the data center admin to recover by time. 1.56 Backup, Restore Ability for the data center admin to maintain backup and restore event logs. 1.57 Backup, Restore Ability for the data center admin to restore previous backup without service interruption. 1.58 Security, Anti- Ability for the data center admin to provide pre-emptive e-mail Virus, Filtering virus protection (scanning prior to delivery at the mail server). 1.59 Security, Anti- Ability for the data center admin to provide pre-emptive e-mail Virus, Filtering content filtering. 1.60 Security, Anti- Ability for the data center admin to whitelist/blacklist senders by Virus, Filtering domain or IP address. 1.61 Security, Anti- Ability for the data center admin to block or allow e-mail based on Virus, Filtering multiple message attributes. 1.62 Security, Anti- Ability for the data center admin to integrate message hygiene Virus, Filtering (antispam/antivirus) with LDAP. 1.63 Security, Anti- Ability for the data center admin to provide message hygiene Virus, Filtering (antispam/antivirus) statistical reports. 1.64 Security, Anti- Ability for the user to encrypt outbound e-mail. Virus, Filtering 1.65 Security, Anti- Ability for the user to establish TLS encryption with other Virus, Filtering businesses or customers. 1.66 Security, Anti- Ability for the data center admin to protect the reputation of Virus, Filtering outbound mail gateways. 1.67 Security, Anti- Ability for the data center admin to protect internal e-mail customer Virus, Filtering identity. 1.68 Remote Access, Ability for the user to access e-mail by secure web or client. Mobile (Calendar, Address book, Ability to send and receive). Messaging 1.69 Remote Access, Ability for the user to access e-mail with Blackberry services using Mobile BlackBerry device. Messaging 1.70 Remote Access, Ability for the user to access e-mail with non-Blackberry mobile Mobile data devices (iPhones, Treos, Pres. Etc.). Messaging 9/17/2009 AEIT 9 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 1.71 Remote Access, Ability for the agency admin to support other mobile device Mobile protocols (ActiveSync). Messaging 1.72 Remote Access, Ability for the agency admin to Create, Update and Delete Mobile Blackberry accounts. Messaging 1.73 Remote Access, Ability for the user to access mailbox and components via a web Mobile browser over a secure (encrypted) connection. Messaging 1.74 Additional E-mail Ability for the user to send/receive e-mails within workflow Services applications. 1.75 Additional E-mail Ability for the user to provide resource reservations integrated into Services e-mail. 1.76 Additional E-mail Ability for the user to access an SMTP bridgehead for agency Services applications. 1.77 Additional E-mail Ability for the user to integrate agency applications into the e-mail Services and mobile messaging environments. 8. Extended Functional Requirements Req. Category List the extended functional requirements – what additional # capabilities could the service provide. 2.1 Archiving, Ability for the user to manually archive to server from their client. Retention, Discovery 2.2 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to electronically redact information Retention, from archival storage. Discovery 2.3 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to digitally certify search results. Retention, Discovery 2.4 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to catalog responsive e-mail (by case) Retention, so that e-mail can be electronically certified as complete to fulfill Discovery the production. 2.5 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to demonstrate due diligence and Retention, maintain markings for privileged and non-responsive search Discovery results. 2.6 Archiving, Ability for the agency admin to provide a full audit trail of discovery Retention, and review. Discovery 2.7 Disaster Ability for the data center admin to do real-time replication to Recovery alternate site. 2.8 Disaster Ability for the data center admin to do near-time replication to Recovery alternate site. 9/17/2009 AEIT 10 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 2.9 Disaster Ability for the data center admin to fail-over mail system and Recovery clients to alternate site. 2.10 Security, Anti- Ability for the data center admin to retrieve quarantined messages. Virus, Filtering 2.11 Security, Anti- Ability for the data center admin to add digital signatures to e-mail. Virus, Filtering 2.12 Remote Access, Ability for the user to access e-mail archive. Mobile Messaging 2.13 Remote Access, Ability for the user to use wireless service with GIS. Mobile Messaging 2.14 Additional E-mail Ability for the user to provide fax service integrated into e-mail. Services 2.15 Additional E-mail Ability for the user to integrate telephone messaging (VOIP) into e- Services mail and vice/versa. 2.16 Additional E-mail Ability for the user to provide List Server option for internal and Services external publishing of information (report subscriptions). 2.17 Additional E-mail Ability for the agency admin to integrate directory services with Services other complimentary external systems for a unified client experience. 2.18 Additional E-mail Ability for the agency admin to provide RSS Feeds. Services 9/17/2009 AEIT 11 Enterprise E-mail Version: 1.5 Customer (Functional) Requirements Created on 07/23/2009 9. Functional Requirements Summary The functional requirements discovery and analysis process yielded the following results: • Email, Calendar, and Contacts service category had a 97% “have and use” response average. • Archiving, Retention, Discovery service category had a 66% “have and use” response average and a 23% “would like to have” response average. • Disaster Recovery service category had a 59% “have and use” response average and a 34% “would like to have” response average. • Backup & Restore service category had a 79% “have and use” response average and a 19% “would like to have” response average. • Security, Anti-Virus, Filtering service category had a 67% “have and use” response average and a 24% “would like to have” response average. • Remote Access, Mobile Messaging service category had a 71% “have and use” response average and an 11% “would like to have” response average. • Additional E-mail service category had a 48% “have and use” response average and a 26% “would like to have” response average. Based on these r esults, the majority of requirements for each category made it into the basic requirements recommendation. In each category except for email, calendar and contacts, the survey showed that there is a potential need for extended services (varying service components, service levels, and costs). This is especially likely for the archiving, disaster recovery, security, and remote – mobile messaging categories. The survey also verified that more than half of agencies polled currently have and use a document collaboration and workflow application. However, in keeping within the scope of the statewide “e-mail, messaging, and calendaring” system proposal, it was agreed that collaboration services (such as shared documents and workflows, instant messaging, and discussion forums) should remain out of scope for this project. Finally, the technical and financial feasibility of each functional requirement will be further evaluated by the Enterprise E-mail technical and financial workgroups prior to submitting the proposed plan for statewide e-mail by December 31, 2009. 9/17/2009 AEIT 12